# Data Lake for music streaming app 'Sparkify'

## Objective: to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. we will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3.

### Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I am tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

### Data sets used

We'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

1. Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
2. Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

#### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
#### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. The log files in the dataset we'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

### Files

1. [`etl.py`](etl.py) : reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
2. [`dwh.cfg`](dwh.cfg) : Contains all the required aws configuration details
3. [`README.md`](README.md) :  provides discussion on our process and decisions

### The Schema for the Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, I've created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table

1. `songplays` - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
     - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables

1. `users` - users in the app
    - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2. `songs` - songs in the music database
    - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3. `artists` - artists in the music database
    - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
4. `time` - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into the specific unit
    - `start_time`, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

### Use

1. Enter the aws credentials in [`dwh.cfg`](dwh.cfg) 
2. Replace the input and output data paths in main function of [`etl.py`](etl.py).
3. Run `python etl.py` in the terminal 

### ETL pipeline

Prerequisites: 

- Data sets and aws configuration details

## Project Steps

1. Create an AWS IAM role with S3 read and write access.
2. Enter the IAM's credentials in the `dl.cfg`configuration file.
3. Create an S3 bucket (note that bucket and cluster on the same zone may increase performance) and enter the URL to the bucket in output_data of main function in `etl.py`.
4. Run `python etl.py` in the terminal to process the data and store it on our created S3 bucket.
